# The recruitment process: Java to Scala transition

Originally, all our projects were written in Scala, but currently we also work on projects written in Java. Hence, we hire both Scala and Java developers with skills adequate to the requirements of a given project.

One can imagine a situation in which skilled Java developers don’t apply for Java positions, but would like to switch to Scala even though they don’t have much experience with this language and its related frameworks and libraries. Normally we would decide that it doesn’t make sense to proceed with the recruitment process because candidates don’t have the required skills and knowledge. On the other hand, after talking with them, we could feel that because they are very capable and skilled software developers in general, they should quickly learn and would really fit in with our [company’s culture and values](company-model.md). We would probably hire them after a few months if they learned Scala in the meantime (ideally at work) and then applied for the position again. We don’t want to lose such people. Depending on the current needs and the situation in projects, we can propose something we call Java to Scala transition. For example, a candidate could have a senior position in their previous company, but due to the lack of the required skills we can’t hire them as a Senior Engineer. Obviously every new employee needs time to get up to speed, but in this case the candidate also has to learn some basic skills, which would probably require additional supervision and so on. Therefore the rules are as follows:

1) For first **three months** of a transition period, the status of a new employee is **slightly lower than the target position** (e.g. Junior Engineer instead of Regular Engineer).

2) After this period, we evaluate Scala-related skills and commitment to the project. If everything is okay, we **increase the [position](engineering-progression.md) appropriately**.

„Wait, the lower position means that the salary is appropriately lower, doesn’t it?” – you could ask. You’re right. The company takes a certain risk by hiring such a candidate and this needs to be reflected. Also, it wouldn't be fair to other employees who actually do more in a project. We believe that these three months for the transition won’t be an obstacle for someone who finds a given project interesting and would like to improve their skills with us. Sometimes it’s necessary to take a small step back to take a really big one forwards later. There was even [a very good talk](https://vimeo.com/87611844) about this in 2013 at the GeeCON conference. Also note that one gains the chance to learn in the best possible way – when working together with experts on a real product.

If you are such a skilled Java developer and you think that working on Scala projects is for you, don’t hesitate to contact us and add that you are interested in this Java to Scala transition path.
